Cooperative Bank of Kenya #ticker:COOP is in talks to acquire 100 percent stake in Jamii Bora Bank, bolstering the listed lender’s asset base and deepening the acquisitions in Kenya’s banking sector. The bank announced Wednesday morning that its board has given green lights to the talks which if successfully will be followed by other regulatory approvals to seal the deal. “The board of directors of Co-operative Bank of Kenya has approved the progression of discussions with Jamii Bora Bank which, if successful, would lead to the Co-operative Bank acquiring the 100 percent shareholding in Jamii Bora Bank,” Co-op bank announced. “The acquisition will strengthen both institutions leveraging on their respective well established domestic and regional corporate public sector, retail business and the 15 million member co-operative movement." The development comes months after the previous suitor, Commercial Bank of Africa, dropped the acquisition bid and instead merged with NIC Bank to form NCBA group. The deal will deepen acquisitions in Kenyan market. Other banks that have been acquired in the recent past include National Bank of Kenya, Habib Bank Kenya, Fidelity Commercial Bank, Giro Commercial Bank, Equatorial Commercial Bank, K-Rep Bank and Fina Bank. Coop Bank will carry out due diligence on the tier III lender, before seeking acquisition nod from the board of directors and shareholders of the two banks. The due diligence will heavily inform the price to be paid by Co-op. CBA had in early January last year made a Sh1.4 billion cash offer to buy out Jamii Bora Bank. The two banks have already informed Central Bank of Kenya (CBK), which is backing the transaction. “CBK welcomes the transaction which will diversify the business models of the two institutions and enhance the stability of the Kenyan banking sector,” said CBK in a statement. The transaction will require green lights from the CBK, Capital Markets Authority and the Competition Authority of Kenya. The Nairobi Securities Exchange Co-op commenced operations in 1965 and had the fourth highest market share (9.63 percent) in the banking industry at the end of last year. In contrast, Jamii bora, started in 2010 after the acquisition by City Finance Bank, had a market share of 0.12 percent, putting it at position 38 out of 39 banks. The deal will lead to changes in market share as well as deepening of branches for Cooperative bank. The tier I lender has 159 branches while Jamii bora has 17. Jamii Bora’s last published financials are for the first quarter of 2018 when it had assets worth Sh12.5 billion. Its liquidity ratio was in negative 11.1 percent compared with CBK’s minimum of 20 percent as at end of March 2018, leaving it in liquidity deficiency of 31.1 percent.