Jambojet has appointed its chief financial officer Karanja Ndegwa as the airline’s interim managing director. Budget airline Jambojet has appointed Karanja Ndegwa as acting managing director, taking over from Allan Kilavuka who was appointed the boss of the parent, Kenya Airways. The Jambojet board of directors made the announcement yesterday, saying Mr Ndegwa’s term will be effective starting Friday. Mr Ndegwa will continue as the airline’s chief financial officer (CFO) as Jambojet searches for a substantive replacement to take over from Mr Kilavuka. Mr Kilavuka, who was appointed the Kenya Airways Plc Group managing director and chief executive beginning, last month, will continue serving on the board of Jambojet as a non-executive director. He led the five-year-old low-cost carrier Jambojet since January 2019. “We are grateful Mr Ndegwa has accepted to continue serving as the chief financial officer even as he takes on the new role of acting managing director. We wish to thank Mr Kilavuka for his dedication and service to Jambojet,” said Vincent Rague, chairman, board of directors, Jambojet. Before joining Jambojet in 2014, Mr Ndegwa worked at the national carrier in different capacities rising to the position of the revenue accounting manager. He is a graduate of Economics and Statistics from the University of Nairobi as well as a Certified Public Accountant. He has more than 20 years experience in the aviation industry, 12 of which have been in leadership positions. He takes over at a turbulent period as airlines continue to be the hardest hit due to the grounding of the planes as countries close borders to contain the spread of the coronavirus. His appointment follows Jambojet’s foray into cross-border flights. Jambojet currently flies to multiple local destinations as well as Entebbe and Kigali from its hub in Nairobi. The airline has been charging significantly low fares compared with other carriers in what has been attributed to pursuit of growth regionally.