Standard Chartered Bank Kenya will on Friday close eight branches due to Covid-19, which has reduced business activities on extended state restrictions on mass gathering. The bank has informed its customers that Koinange, Harambee Avenue, T-Mall, Two Rivers, Ruaraka/Garden City, Upper Hill, Jomo Kenyatta International Airport and Maritime branches would be closed for three months effective May 1. The temporary closure comes at a time banks have also been forced to cut weekday operating time by one hour in the wake of coronavirus pandemic that saw government enforce 7pm to 5am curfew. “As we play our part in minimising the spread of the Covid-19, effective May 1, we will temporarily close these branches for three months,” said StanChart in a message to customers. The lender becomes the second to close branches after NCBA did so on April 1, shutting eight branches namely Changamwe, Galleria, Eldoret, Junction Mall, Thika Road Mall, Hilton, Machakos and Meru. Queues in banking halls have reduced in line with dropping economic activities and social-distancing measures that have seen businesses encourage the use of alternative channels such as mobile and online banking. Banks mid last month removed transaction costs for customers who move money between their mobile wallets and bank accounts after a deal with Central Bank of Kenya. Many lenders have also staggered staff shifts to decongest workplaces and reduce risks of coronavirus infections. Kenya had 374 confirmed cases of Covid-19 by yesterday after 11 more people tested positive. The virus has infected more than three million people globally, killing over 200,000. StanChart recently announced a three-month repayment break on personal loans and mortgages to its customers to cushion them against the economic hit from coronavirus. The lender further gave mortgage customers an option for a six-month window of paying interest only instead of servicing together with principal sum. StanChart also offered a window for extension of loan or mortgage repayments for up to 12 months.