Kenyans from all walks of life started streaming into Nyayo National Stadium as early as 5am on Tuesday for the requiem service of former president Daniel Toroitich arap Moi. The former president died at the Nairobi Hospital on Tuesday last week. School buses that ferried mourners to the venue were parked in various places as people were asked to alight and line up from the access road that branches from Bunyala Road into the stadium. At round 7.20am, the military gun carriage arrived at the venue. Shortly after, some of Moi's relatives and VIP guests started arriving. Kenyans had been asked to be seated by 8am.   Governors, including Nairobi's Mike Sonko and Meru's Kiraitu Murungi, arrived at the venue at around 8.15am. They arrived in a bus and were let into the stadium through a VIP entrance. The service was to start at 10am after the arrival of President Uhuru Kenyatta, State officials and guests. LAST JOURNEY Moi's body left Lee Funeral Home at 8.27am under heavy military security, headed to State House. The convoy then left State House around 9.20am for Nyayo Stadium where Kenyans awaited the arrival of the body ahead of the service. From State House, where President Uhuru Kenyatta received the body, the military procession escorted it to Nyayo Stadium. Once there, pallbearers then carried the casket from the military truck to the dais, where his family was seated nearby.   About 11 heads of state had been expected in the event. By Tuesday morning, it had not yet been revealed who they were are and whether they would all attend the requiem mass, or will opt to attend the funeral service at Kabarak, Nakuru County on Wednesday. Among the dignitaries present at Nyayo Stadium were presidents and former heads of state of East African countries. Here are the VIPs who attended Moi's last salute in Nairobi: 1. Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni 2. Rwandan President Paul Kagame 3. South Sudan's President Salva Kiir 4. Tanzania's former president Benjamin Mkapa 5. Tanzania's former president Jakaya Kikwete 6. Ethiopia's President Sahle-Work Zewde 7. Djibouti's President Ismail Omar Guelleh 8. Nigeria's Vice President Yemi Osinbajo 9. Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic's President Brahim Ghali   EULOGY Raymond Moi, the former president's son, addressed the gathering of Kenyans and dignitaries. He read Moi's eulogy. He noted that his father was named Toroitich, which in Tugen means "we welcome home the cattle". Moi's father died when he was 4 years old, leaving his elder brother to play the guardian role, he said in the eulogy. PUBLIC HOLIDAY Last week, the government designated Tuesday, February 11, a public holiday for the memorial service. Mzee Moi’s body has been lying in state at Parliament Buildings for three days and a staggering 213,000 people were granted access to view his body, according to police sources. Moi’s will be the second State funeral with full civilian and military ceremonial honours in events that will largely mirror that of Kenya’s founding president Mzee Jomo Kenyatta. The difference with his predecessor’s State funeral is that while Mzee Moi will get a 19-gun salute and will not be dressed in military uniform, Mzee Kenyatta, who died while in office in 1978, had a 21-gun salute and was dressed in military regalia. PROGRAMME Here's how the service was set to be conducted, according to the official programme.